Introduction to the World of
High-Technology Marketing
“Cars” of the Future
By Jamie Hoffman
In 1908, Henry Ford’s famous Model T rolled off the assembly line. Within 100 years the auto-
mobile revolutionized society, putting people on wheels. Today, the average U.S. household owns2.28 vehicles. Yet with gas prices on the rise, concerns about the environment mounting, and traf-fic congestion plaguing cities large and small, inventors and entrepreneurs are teaming up totransform personal automotive travel. In the very near future, popular transportation options willinclude personal jet-packs, flying cars, and carbon-free, stackable cars!
Futuristic Fliers
Thanks to the Terrafugia’s Transition®“personal air vehicle,” aggravating rush-hour traffic will
become history. Brave commuters can take to the skies in a two-person light sport aircraft withautomated retractable wings. Using lighter and stronger materials and more efficient engines, thevehicle aims to be classified by the FAA as the easier-to-fly light sport aircraft. Requiring only1,500 feet to take off, the Transition will run on premium unleaded gas, fly at 120 mph, and  havea range of 100–500 miles with 30 miles per gallon (mpg) in the air. On the ground, the vehiclewill get 40 highway miles per gallon and 30 city mpg.
1Other companies offer flying cars as well,
such as the pioneer in this market, the Moller Skycar (www.moller.com/skycar.htm) availablesince 1999.
Want to fly to work, but prefer feeling the wind in your face? Try the Jet Pack T-73 created
by Jet Pack International, LLC. With a range of 11 miles and maximum flying time of nine min-utes, commuters can blast to work at 83 miles per hour (mph) at 250 feet above ground. The T-73will hold 5 gallons of Jet A fuel and will retail around $200,000 (including training).
2
Photo reprinted with permission of Terrafugia, Inc., Woburn, Mass.
(continued)
From Chapter 1 of Marketing of High-Technology Products and Innovations, 3/e. Jakki Mohr. Sanjit Sengupta. Stanley Slater.
Copyright © 2010 by Pearson Prentice Hall. All rights reserved.1Introduction to the World of High-Technology Marketing
Conventional Alternatives
Now, for those who want eco-friendly transportation combined with adrenaline, but aren’t quite
ready to take to the skies, check out the Tesla Roadster™. The Roadster sports a base price of$109,000 and proves that a 100% electric sports car can perform just as well as the traditional mod-els but with zero emissions. Speeding from zero to 60 mph in 3.9 seconds, the Roadster has a man-ual transmission, and a 248 horsepower (hp) motor with over 300 pound-feet of zero-rpm torque.The battery provides for a 220-mile range, earning the equivalent gas mileage of 256 mpg, and takes3.5 hours to recharge.
3Who knew being fast and being green could be achieved in one vehicle?
For those more comfortable staying grounded and keeping some change in their pockets, con-
sider the Aptera. Designed by physicist Steve Fambro, the Aptera seats two, weighs 850 pounds, has a drag coefficient of 0.11 (compared to a typical car’s drag of 0.30–0.35), maxesout at 95 mph, and impressively gets 230 mpg! Aptera is developing several versions: The classichybrid design will sport a 12 hp diesel/19 kW electric motor combination and will be priced around$29,000; the all-electric version will be priced around $26,000 and will have a 120-mile range.
4
For those uninterested in buying a car but still needing access to a low-cost vehicle on an as-
needed basis, consider Smart Cities’ foldable, electric CityCar developed at MIT’s Media Lab.Designed to mitigate the negative external effects of the traditional vehicle, not only is the City-Car electric but like airport luggage carts, it is “stackable,” fitting six to eight cars into a singleconventional parking place. The CityCar will be available to rent at transportation hubs and canbe returned when finished.
5
Photo reprinted with permission of Jet Pack International, LLC, Denver, Colo.
Photo reprinted with permission of Tesla Motors, Inc.,
San Carlos, Calif.Tesla RoadsterTM
Photo reprinted with permission of Aptera Motors,Carlsbad, Calif.Aptera2Introduction to the World of High-Technology Marketing
India’s Tata Motors recently announced an extremely low-cost automobile with a small car-
bon footprint: the Nano. Dubbed “India’s Model T,” the four-door, two-cylinder family car canfit four passengers and has lower emissions than most two-wheeled Indian vehicles—at an as-tounding price of only US$2,500! Touting a lean design that minimizes weight and increasesfuel efficiency, as well as safety design features that protect occupants, the Nano is sure to raisea stir in India and abroad. The company has said it expects the car to revolutionize the auto in-dustry, and analysts believe the Nano may force other manufacturers to lower their own pricing.There also is speculation that the process innovations necessary to produce a car at such a lowprice will threaten the operating models of market leaders. French automaker Renault SA and itsJapanese partner Nissan Motor Company are trying to determine if they can sell a compact carfor less than $3,000.
6
In December 2007, the world faced a constellation of powerful factors with potentially devastat-
ing consequences:
• Global warming
• Inexorable increases in the global population and the attendant pressures on food systems,
health care, and education
• Environmental degradation and the depletion of natural resources• Terrorism and its impact on global politics• Increasing divergence between the “haves” and the “have-nots” across the globeCityCar photo reprinted with permission of Franco Vairani/MIT
Smart Cities, Cambridge, Mass.
Photo reprinted with permission of Tata Motors, Mumbai, India.CityCar
Nano3Introduction to the World of High-Technology Marketing
What are the possible solutions to these seemingly intractable problems? Radical innovations
in technologies are certainly a key part of the solution, offering exciting possibilities and develop-ments. (Of course, these technological innovations must be coupled with courageous political andregulatory decisions, and changes in individual and societal behavior as well.) Innovations in greenbuilding technologies, transportation and fuel technologies, alternative energy solutions, technolo-gies to bring potable water and the power of information to impoverished areas of the world—alloffer tantalizing promises for a different future. Yet, despite their promise, all too many inventionsdo not achieve commercial success.
Indeed, the world of high technology is filled with both promise and peril. Promise arises
from the potential advantages that these new technologies offer: to alleviate human suffering, to en-hance people’s lives, to make businesses more efficient and effective, to solve social problems, tochart unexplored territories—seemingly infinite possibilities. On the other hand, the peril arises notonly from the risks of the technology—say, through unintended consequences or the misuse of tech-nology—but also from the risks faced by a new technology; the largest risk is commercial failureand the inability to deliver on its promise.
Responsible high-technology marketing provides a balanced assessment of the promises and
perils of new technologies. In particular, the role of marketing is to inform the development andcommercialization efforts of high-tech companies, ultimately enhancing the odds that the new tech-nologies will deliver on their promise and avoid downside risks.
Yet, think about the origins of many high-tech companies. Genentech pioneered drugs based
on recombinant DNA technology in 1976; Google’s breakthrough search engine in 1998 was basedon an algorithm that ranked websites based on their relevance or importance. Regardless of the spe-cific industry—biotechnology, telecommunications, information technology, consumer electron-ics—the origins of many high-tech companies are frequently found in their scientific or engineeringdevelopments. As a result, they often mistakenly believe that marketing is superfluous; the superior-ity of their technological innovations should be sufficient to convince buyers to adopt their newproducts. Although they might pay lip service to the importance of marketing, they may lack theskills and competencies to develop effective marketing strategies. As a result, the role of, and needfor, marketing is often misunderstood or downplayed in their organizations. They often lack market-ing expertise or relegate the role of marketing to second-class status (i.e., beneath the role of engi-neering/R&D).
Even high-tech companies that understand the importance of marketing face uncertainty and
complications in their marketing decision making. Technical people may have a hard time becom-ing market focused and understanding how to interact with their nontechnical customers. Marketingactivities are sometimes either an afterthought to the product/technology development process orare not accorded the same importance as product/technology development. Cross-functional collab-oration between engineers and marketers is a necessity but is extremely difficult to implement well.A further complication is that many people hired to do “marketing” lack an understanding of how tomarket in high-tech industries. Even well-known high-tech companies such as Microsoft andIntel—who are perceived as being very sophisticated marketers—have expressed publicly that theyare not sufficiently “market driven.”
Due to these and other complicating factors, the failure rates of more innovative products are
higher than the failure rates of products in general
7—usually well over 50%.8In the funding of
high-tech start-ups, venture capitalists often follow a 4-3-3 rule for their technology investmentportfolios. Out of 10 investments, they expect 4 to fail, 3 to break even, and 3 to generate profits ex-ceeding all the losses on the other seven projects.
9A robust set of empirical studies demonstrates:
Technological superiority alone is insufficient for ensuring the success of high-tech products; rather,high-tech companies must complement their technological prowess with a set of marketing compe-tencies in order to maximize their odds of success.
One important marketing competency is to think beyond the technology itself, and to gain
sophisticated insights about the customers who will adopt and use the technology. As Andy4